The Root Cause Analysis Process
RCA has five identifiable steps.

Step One: Define the Problem
What do you see happening?
What are the specific symptoms?

Step Two: Collect Data
What proof do you have that the problem exists?
How long has the problem existed?
What is the impact of the problem?
You need to analyze a situation fully before you can move on to look at factors that contributed to the problem. To maximize the effectiveness of your RCA, get together everyone – experts and front line staff – who understands the situation. People who are most familiar with the problem can help lead you to a better understanding of the issues.

Step Three: Identify Possible Causal Factors
What sequence of events leads to the problem?
What conditions allow the problem to occur?
What other problems surround the occurrence of the central problem?
During this stage, identify as many causal factors as possible. Too often, people identify one or two factors and then stop, but that's not sufficient. With RCA, you don't want to simply treat the most obvious causes – you want to dig deeper.

Use these tools to help identify causal factors:

Appreciation  – Use the facts and ask "So what?" to determine all the possible consequences of a fact.
5 Whys  – Ask "Why?" until you get to the root of the problem.
Drill Down  – Break down a problem into small, detailed parts to better understand the big picture.
Cause and Effect Diagrams  – Create a chart of all of the possible causal factors, to see where the trouble may have begun.

Step Four: Identify the Root Cause(s)
Why does the causal factor exist?
What is the real reason the problem occurred?
Use the same tools you used to identify the causal factors (in Step Three) to look at the roots of each factor. These tools are designed to encourage you to dig deeper at each level of cause and effect.

Step Five: Recommend and Implement Solutions
What can you do to prevent the problem from happening again?
How will the solution be implemented?
Who will be responsible for it?
What are the risks of implementing the solution?
